Hello everyone.
Welcome to the premier videos
for the Fall Annual Town meeting
2025 for the town of Natick.
My name is Jeff Alderson, your town moderator.
I'm joined today by Amanda Loomis, director of Economic
and Community Development, other way around, other way
around community and economic
development for the town of Natick.
And we're here to talk zoning as we typically do.
So I appreciate you taking the time to, to talk us
through the articles on the warrant that relate to zoning
and, and, and for your section.
We're gonna kick off with article 20,
article 20 Sounds Ominous Removal of Earth Products.
But maybe walk us through what part
of zoning is related to earth products.
Yeah, so Earth products, what there's a lot
of different types of earth removal and earth products
and what this is really getting at was they did not,
back in 1974 when this was put into the zoning bylaw,
did not want the land being completely stripped,
basically like a gravel pit or other type of use.
They did not want that occurring.
And then those products being sold elsewhere.
So basically stripping the land, selling 'em elsewhere.
However, what we are doing is just an update on this section
because although we are not stripping the land
and we will continue not to allow the stripping of land
for sale elsewhere, what is happening during construction is
that earth removal activities are happening
and with a portions of this being in place,
it is preventing those materials from being able
to be taken out of natick.
Okay. The use those products that are being removed
or blasted, et cetera, can't be used on site sometimes
because it's excessive of what is needed.
And so based on this it would not be able
to remove 'em elsewhere.
So this is an update to language from 1974.
We're keeping the intent.
So no, there's still no stripping,
there's still no gravel pits allowed,
but it's just, it can allow for good development.
Okay. Article 21, it feels like,
I think we talked about flood and floodplains in the spring,
but here we are talking again about about flood definitions
and and amendments.
Yep. What's changing in zoning for flood?
So what we would be doing is actually deleting this
section which is no mineral 5G flooding.
So what this actually says is that
land cannot be developed upon
or redeveloped upon if it is prone
to flooding now or in the future.
So basically with the intensity of the storms
that have been occurring, every,
every lot is subject to flooding.
But also since this was put into place,
probably back in the seventies, we
can't find the exact date.
A lot has changed. So we've had the flood plain
district bylaw, which was actually updated at the spring
2024 town meeting, which is under fema.
We have the aquifer protection district,
but we also have the stormwater management bylaw.
And all of those bylaws together
or separately actually protect both the landowner
and a budding because if water
does transfer from a property onto an abutting property,
that's called trespass and that is actually not allowed.
And the homeowner is responsible
for mitigating any water trespass off
of their property onto other properties.
So by deleting this, the town is not losing any
of its protections, it's just removing an obsolete section
of the bylaw because new sections have come into place
or new regulations have come into place.
Okay.
Article 22 is, looks around the topic
of limited site plan review.
Could you just kind of walk us through
what a site plan review is, maybe
by definition then talk about
what's being changed here. Yeah,
Absolutely.
So I believe it was back in 2023 at the SPRINGTOWN meeting,
Natick actually did a comprehensive update
of section no numeral six dd,
which is site plan review and special permit.
This is the way that the town actually reviews its projects
to determine yes, we can do it this way
or no, these modifications need
to occur like site circulation, fire
and police access, parking, storm water lighting, et cetera.
And so what this does is limited site plan review is a less
review based on the Dover amendment,
which is mass general Law chapter 40 a section three,
which basically allows a community to review projects
that are submitted by a religious institution,
educational institution
or like use for a limited review
where the town can only review bulk height
and the parking lot storm water related to the parking lot,
landscaping related to the parking lot
and lighting related to the parking lot.
So what happened was when we updated that, at
that time we only had included childcare uses.
But since our limited site plan review does actually review
educational and religious, the
attorney general had suggested that we put in educational
and religious uses within our definition section 200
limited site plan review.
So we are not taking away anything, it's since we do
as a community regulate site plan review, we are making sure
that those three uses are all captured under our limited
site plan review because that is what the town can review.
And so the motivation for this article, I,
as I'm educating myself on the process as well,
when we voted at town meeting in spring
of 2023 on this topic, it went to the attorney general
for review and they came back with specific feedback.
So this is one of those cases where we're just trying
to like do based on do do an an extra
step based on their feedback.
But it does require going through the whole process
again to update that bylaw.
Yes, absolutely. And
because site plan review is not actually under mass general
law, it's unique to each community.
That's why she had flagged it
as if you're gonna review it,
you should have this in there. Got
It.
Article 23, use regulation schedule.
This feels like one of the things I've, I've seen you come
to town meeting ask for these like you,
we call it cleaning up the tables.
This feels like this is a little bit
more of a cleaning up the tables.
Maybe walk us through what that
that schedule is and what's happening.
Absolutely. So the use regulation schedule has been an
ongoing project for quite a few now town meetings,
what the use regulation schedule does is set tells a
community or people wanting to develop or use
or basically use the land for certain things,
what they can and cannot do.
So it basically goes down, we have use headers
that is the classification of like the big categories,
but then we have the use categories which are the specific
uses that are and are not allowed.
Then we say why, which are as a right.
That doesn't mean that they have no review,
they just might have site plan review
or a different type of review SP which is a special permit.
And then we have no, which is not allowed in the town
of Natick, we actually do not allow use variances.
So then anything with the no
or the N is not allowed to be permitted here.
So what we are doing at this one, this is our last batch
of the comprehensive review
because we've been breaking it up into use header sections.
And so this is actually looking at basically uses
that are relative to transportation communications
and utility light manufacturing.
And what we actually did
with manufacturing was we divided it into two
because in recent years since post World War II
manufacturing uses have really changed.
Before it was really kind of like that nitty gritty,
like you're in there, you're dirty kind of situation,
but light manufacturing is a lot different.
That's more of like artisans craft brew establishments,
biotech maker spaces, printing presses,
wholesale bakery and food.
Whereas industrial uses that is like the warehouses
or the commercial movers, storage facility distributions,
municipal waste facilities.
So we wanted to divide those two out
because they are kind of two different categories.
And so that's where we were really focusing on at this one,
again, this is the last batch of all the use headers.
And then in the spring
of 2025 we're gonna do a comprehensive review
to make sure everything's in its right location,
everything is what we want it to say.
Also, a big thing with this project was taking the
definition language out of the use regulation schedule
and putting it into the actual section 200 definitions which
then help for usability. So
I was gonna ask if this is the last one
and we put it in the rear view mirror
and I bet you'd be happy to do that,
but it sounds like we're gonna come back next spring.
Yep. Give it one last look. Yes.
But hopefully at that point, this whole section,
this has been a big part of your job coming to town meeting,
talking about this particular section
of our bylaws for quite a while.
It is, but it's extremely important
because there's things that you wanna see in the community
and you wanna foster those.
There are other things in the community that you're like,
this would be great in this location
but not so great in this location.
Or hey, we don't wanna see this.
And that's what this use regulation schedule really does.
And so it is a great tool
for the community making sure it's formatted correctly.
But again, we're putting this into place.
It's a really big project, but that's why we want to have
to come back at the fall 20
or fall spring, nope, sorry, 2025.
Yeah. Spring town meeting to really update
and make sure everything is what we said
and it's connecting the pieces.
'cause we've been connecting the pieces as we've been going,
but sometimes you just need
to look at it once it's completed.
Yeah, it's a, a project that spans multiple meetings,
multiple moderators at this point.
It is, it is. It's been a fun project actually.
And so then moving on Article 24 Yeah.
Talking about our neighborhood corridor
and limited commercial zoning district,
maybe some definitions without,
I know you're probably gonna put a map up
to help people understand where this cuts in,
but kind of where, where,
where are we talking about for these two areas? So
What this is is Article 24 is kind of a two piecer
west central corridor in the town meeting warrant book.
It does say neighborhood corridor.
But in the public hearing process,
the planning board decided, you know what,
this is actually West Central corridor.
Okay. So we're gonna focus on that.
So what this does is it really looks at from the Framingham
Natick municipal line traversing eastbound on 1 35
or West Central Street all the way
to an area a little past the dog park.
Okay. We'd be looking at the north
and the south side of 1 35 for this use
with the northern boundary at this time being the tracks.
And when I say at this time there's no intention
to bring commercial over the tracks on the north side
of the tracks, but it is
to look at those single family residentials to see
are those lots conforming and
or are they actually seeking a lot of dimensional relief?
So that's something we would be reviewing in the later
because that's a way to decrease the number
of ZBA reviews is by making sure
that your dimensional regulation schedule actually conforms
to what's out there in practice today.
And as we know, most lots in Natick have some kind
of non-conformity dimensionally.
So with that being said, what we were doing is looking at it
as a form-based code,
looking at each parcel individually based on its individual
self, the topography around it,
but also the different types of uses
and where it's situated on this corridor.
And so yes, we are creating one big huge zoning district,
which is called the West Central corridor or WCC.
But then within that corridor it is then divided into four
or five different subdistricts.
So we have five different subject districts,
which you'll see on the map.
One of 'em, which is our highest density one is gonna
be Subdistrict five.
And that's gonna be known as the West Central hub.
And the reason why we're calling it a hub is
because that is the main focal points of these,
this whole entire district.
So where that would be is sur the areas
around the West Natick commuter rail station, right?
Because we wanna make sure that it's, people are using that.
But then also the resources are around that.
The other two places that we are looking at is the
intersection of West Central and Mill Street
and the West Central
and Speed Street doesn't mean that all parcels,
but for a majority those are
where these hubs will be located
because those are major transportation corridors
and where things kind of con centralize.
The next one is actually the West Central connector.
And so a connector is everything
that connects things to each other.
So what we're doing is focusing the West Central connector
or S four subdistrict between those hubs.
So it's making the connection.
So you'll see kind of like rise
and fall in terms of types of density
allowed uses, et cetera.
The focus of the S five
and the S four is also street front activation.
And when we say street front activation,
that means commercial uses that
are basically on the neighborhood scale
or a corridor scale that people would go to, such
as like convenience stores, restaurants, different types
of uses, gyms, et cetera.
But then also we wanna have a pedestrian friendly
because as you may
or may not know, west Central Street is a major corridor
for bicycling, running, et cetera.
And so there is no sidewalk on the northern side
of West Central Street.
So with this zoning, it would actually help us implement
the installation of a multi-use path along that north side
of West Central Street.
So a lot of the folks, I think that, that live in
that area, I think they did receive some
correspondence from the town.
Yeah. And a mailer.
Could you just talk to like
outreach efforts that have been going on?
'cause that's a, that's a, when you look at that on the map,
that's a lot of people that could be impacted.
I'm just kind of curious as to what the town's been doing
to talk with 'em about, you know,
being able to be heard at a meeting.
Yeah, totally. So the planning board
has their public hearing process.
And so prior to the opening of the public hearing process,
we are required by Mass General law to send out notification
to the abutting communities in addition to MAPC
and also the executive office
of Housing Livable communities.
That's the bare minimum. However,
census does impact so many people.
And we were holding public meetings back in December
of the prior year and in the summer of 2024, sorry, I had
to think of what year we're in and we had
meetings during those times.
However, not all residents probably within the corridor were
notified because at
that time the notification was very limited to
what we were looking at was the Framingham Nat municipal
line to Mill Street.
We expanded that to the dog park.
And so what we did was we actually sent the legal mailers
for the opening public hearing to all
of the abutters within 300 feet
of the West Central District.
And so that was well over 1200 legal mailers that went out.
We received about 50 of them back,
which is actually standard because people move, et cetera.
But we did have that out.
It's also been posted on our website.
And then also just trying
to get the word out via social media and other mechanisms.
So if someone still has a question about,
about these proposed zoning changes for Article 24,
what's the best way that they can sort
of educate themselves right now?
Yep. So they can check out the website.
First of all, if they just wanna see
what the materials look like or they can shoot me an email.
Okay. And I'll definitely get back to them if, as long
as it's questions, like if they're just giving like an
opinion, like I'll read them and everything.
But if there's no direct questions then
it's hard to respond.
Okay. But if there's questions, that's awesome.
'cause it's great to know what people are thinking
or have you heard kind of thing.
But it, it's really just getting information out there.
The other two districts, subdistricts within this district
is actually SUBDISTRICT three,
which is the West Central residential.
And so what that is, is actually taking the existing
residential that are already occurs on West Central Street
and making it conforming.
'cause a lot of those are in the residential single,
but they're actually two families and townhouses.
And so making those uses
conforming into the zoning district. So it's
A benefit for those folks that are living there now
to be able to see, you know, yep.
That their, that their, the way their property is
is described accurately in the
New zoning that that is correct.
'cause currently single family RSA zoning
only one families are allowed
and there's a lot of two families based on the analysis.
And then we also have the Subdistrict one,
which is a west central conservation and open space.
And so that's taking places where that can't be developed
or may not be developed such as wetlands
or other type of conservation areas, areas
and using those as open space conservation areas.
And the reason why we wanted to note those is
because those areas are equally important,
but they need to be zoned something
and we want them to be represented as the community wants
to see more open space,
conservation space, trails, et cetera.
And so that's the other big thing
with this West central corridor.
Landowners are starting to change hands in terms
of property, whether that just be passing along
to family members or just getting out
of land ownership business.
And so currently what's in the books is
a lot of fragmented zoning.
So we have limited commercial zoning district,
which is a very dated type of zoning district
for a while prior to the use regulation schedule update,
restaurants weren't even allowed in the commercial
limited commercial district. And
There are a lot of restaurants on that stretch, right?
Yeah. And also commercial uses.
And then we also, but then intermittently there's commercial
two, which is different types of commercials.
And then you have random one family houses within these.
So what we are really trying to do is
where do these different uses fall within this corridor?
What types of uses?
The other thing that we also wanted to look at,
which is why we were going with a form-based code kind
of is there, is if, if you've ever run this or walked it
or driven it, you'll notice
that there's actually topography changes,
especially when you're at the Framingham Natick municipal
line headed eastbound.
So you'll go past the junkyard, the medical building,
and then the Wendy's
and you'll start, you're actually gradually going up a hill
towards the top of that hill.
You have several, two
or three family residential structures.
So if you were to put anything of height on top of
that hill, it would be like a large
skyscraper or or a lighthouse.
'cause those are currently allowed at 35 feet.
So what we did was we looked at the topography to see
what can and can't be done based on
what the intrusion would be in the sky plain.
And so when you're at the peak of that,
that actually stays at 35 feet.
But as you go down where you can use the topography to allow
for height, you can actually allow
for more stories which would actually be consistent
with what's at the top of that hill.
So we were really looking at the parcels individually,
which is also a big benefit
of using a hybrid form-based code.
We save a hybrid form-based code.
It's because form-based code is specifically written one
way, but every community
that's been successful in its form-based code has actually
tailored it to their communities.
Saratoga Springs, Brookline, Andover,
all have form-based codes in certain areas.
And so there's a lot of detail but,
but really dig into the details on the website.
Yeah, take a look if you're interested as a property owner,
take a look where you're at, look at this section
that you might be Yep.
Applicable to. And then
reach out to you if they have any questions.
Absolutely. That would be great. Great.
Article 25 i I, we see this acronym all the time.
A DU accessory dwelling unit.
So I always wanna ask, let's remind folks
what an accessory dwelling unit is
and then what's being proposed in terms
of updating the bylaw.
Yep. So the accessory dwelling unit
or a DU is allowed
as a right throughout the Commonwealth per Mass General Lab,
chapter 48, section three, which is again
what we had talked about in the limited site plan review.
It is a protected use as long as it's one A DU, anything
above one A DU is actually a special permit
or communities could say no natick.
We chose to do it a special permit process.
So this all came into a play back in August
of 2024 when the governor signed the,
basically the housing act.
And what it required is each community allow
for accessory dwelling units as of right by February
of 2025, Natick wanted to make sure that we were
all proactive because our town meeting falls after February.
So we did everything that we could in terms
of the information that we, at the time
of the fall town meeting for this, we moved it forward.
We have actually had nine ADUs go
through the permitting process
and are now in the building permit
phase of that whole project.
So people are really taking advantage of it.
They are, yeah. And it's actually,
they're all different types of ADUs,
but some of the items that we got flagged with in
that fall edition of our A DU
Flagged by the attorney
General flagged
by the attorney general was
that we called it principal one family dwelling.
And she does not want it to say one family
because ADUs can actually be on lots
where there's two families or townhouses.
So the, she wanted the one family to be stricken.
So now we're calling it principal residential dwelling,
which is consistent with state law.
That's one of the amendments.
So those were, when you see a lot of changes,
it's a lot of just striking out people
And you, you include on the website the red lines Yes.
Of what the, the motion language is proposing. Yep,
Absolutely.
And then another one was is that if you are within
a half mile of a commuter rail station, you do not have
to provide parking for the A DU.
If you're a half mile or more, then you actually had
to provide one parking space.
So Natick, we rode ours a minimum of one parking space
for everyone a half mile and more.
And it was requested, actually required that we only say one
or put this long sentence in saying that,
but homeowner may provide more.
We were keeping it consistent with our language,
which is why we wrote it a minimum of one
'cause yeah, you're required to do one,
but if the homeowner wanted
to provide more Right, they could.
And then the next one was the fact
that if you have a detached A DU, so there's a lot
of different types of ADUs.
You have an attached, which is part
of the main principle structure.
A detached is separate.
So in a detached A DU, we had limited the height
to two floors or 25 feet
because an accessory dwelling unit, unlike a one family
dwelling, can be within 10 feet of a lot line
because it is an accessory.
So we were thinking that's a big building if you allow it to
what a single family can be, which is two
and a half stories, 35 feet on a
property line within 10 feet.
So we had limited it to two floors, 25 feet
that got struck in out by the ag.
So we have to remove that from our zoning bylaws. Okay.
So the updates for this were requirements of the ags office.
Another one of those times where we, we pass one bylaw,
it goes through town meeting, it has to go
through attorney general review and they come back
with some feedback and some changes. So
Yep.
And hopefully this is the last, hopefully this is the
Last one.
Yeah.
Article 25 seems very specific
to an address zero Worcester Street.
Yep. Can you just kind of walk us
through what's actually happening here? Yeah. For
That location so we can provide a map as well.
So zero Worcester Street is actually what they know
what is known as the Monticello Inn.
This parcel is zoned RSA or residential single in Natick.
Even though there is a motel located on the property,
you actually have to, to access this portion
of the property, you have
to drive from Route nine in Framingham
through Framingham into Natick Na Framingham's portion is
actually zoned business, which is one
of their business zoning districts
within the Golden Triangle.
This site is very challenging.
If you do look at the map and you'll see that it's very long
and narrow from Framingham.
And then the buildable portion is in Natick,
which looks like a triangle.
However, with that being said,
when you look at the site itself,
you have Jordan's furniture,
which is actually on top of a hill.
There's about a two and a half story retaining wall
that disconnects Jordan's furniture from the Monticello.
And then there is other commercial uses around,
but to the south of this property, it's residential,
single family neighborhoods.
So in no way were we opening this up to allow a cut
through from the residential to Route nine.
It was just to rezone a parcel that is currently
in residential zoning RSA to commercial two,
which would allow for the motel
to be a conforming use rather than a non-conforming use.
Other than that, that was, it was just a map change.
Alright. Alright.
So now we're gonna switch gears a little bit
and talk about article articles 27 and 28.
I'm gonna sort of talk about them around the same time.
Yeah, they're both related to the
Community preservation committee.
Yeah. And so maybe it might be worth reminding folks
that are, that are, that are watching,
we've already passed at town meeting,
we've accepted like the the
for the Community Preservation Act.
Yeah. And so a certain percentage,
I think it's like about 1% of our
taxes are going into a fund
for the community preservation committee.
And that's already voted, that's already happening.
So that's not up for discussion at this town meeting.
I just wanna be clear about that. I get a
lot of questions about that.
What Article 27 is really about is where that,
where those funds get deposited into accounts
that the Community Preservation Committee can use.
That's correct. So kind of walk us through
what we might expect about Article 27. Yep.
Article 27 is, so we have a lump sum that comes in.
One is from the taxes that are generated, as you said, 1%.
But then we also get the state match,
which we get annually around November.
So what we have to do is determine we have to do a minimum
of 10% of those funds into three different buckets.
Those buckets include open space
and recreation, historic preservation,
and what they call community housing,
which we call community affordable
housing 'cause it's for affordable housing.
Those remainder 65% can actually go into
what they call the CPA general fund, which is used
for any types of projects that qualify for a CPA project,
but don't have to be within those 10% requirements.
We also, at the SPRINGTOWN meeting of this year,
did allocate the 5% administrative Right.
Which is just for administrative purposes for the CPC.
So that's all we were doing was putting those 10%
into those three buckets just to make sure that
as we continue to move forward, it's appropriated.
So it's just a simple requirement
that's required even though. Right.
And, and as of right now, just it's worth mentioning,
we're not quite sure what the motion is exactly going
to look like at the time this was recorded to,
to come to the floor of town meeting.
But we are expecting there'll probably be a motion
to do the appropriation, the allocation of that,
of those amounts into those funds just as a sort
of a pro forma action by the,
by the town. That is correct. To
Get that done.
Yep. That is correct. And it's actually required
to do the 10%. Right.
Article 28 though is
where it gets a little bit more interesting
and I'm actually getting a lot of questions about some
specific projects and, and, and how that's gonna be handled.
So Article 28 is where the,
the Community preservation committee has
heard proposals made a recommendation
for specific projects to be funded.
And so a lot of people that have been following this have
been asking when will they be, you know,
the town be voting on specific projects and here it is.
Right? Yes. And,
and I think there were originally eight original proposals.
Yep. And only seven are going through Yep. This process.
So maybe kind of tell us about briefly if you
can, those seven projects. Yeah,
Absolutely.
So if anyone wants to know anything really about the CPEC,
the Community Preservation Committee
or CPA, which is Community Preservation Act,
definitely check it out on the website.
Under the Community economic development, we have Cons
or CPC
and everything that they've done,
which includes the community preservation plan, the letters
of interest, which is actually the start of submittal
for an actual application.
And it also includes all the information
for the Community Preservation Act applications,
which we're reviewing now.
All that information is on our website.
So if anyone's really interested in the specifics
of the projects, what was submitted, et cetera.
So what Article 28 is, it's actually gonna be one,
it's one article, but it's actually subdivided into series
of different motions.
Sot meeting will be voting on each individual sub
motion individually.
Okay. So other communities that have had CPA for much longer
actually just vote a slate,
which is all the projects up or down.
But since this is our first time, we want
to vote projects individually
and allow everyone to take a look at them.
And maybe in the future we can amend it
And we are expecting.
Just, just so we're clear, I I have had some questions about
specific projects and people asking when specific motions be
heard on which night of town meeting.
Yeah. And so all I can say about that is if,
if you're watching watch the website in terms of
what we expect, which articles
and which motions will be heard, which Knights
of Town meeting, some town meeting members might actually
move to a procedural motion
to hear a specific motion on a specific date and time.
So pay attention for that.
I I think there are, there,
there might be one project in this list
that's gonna get more attention than others.
And so just do pay attention to the website in terms
of when it might be fixed to a date
and time, if that's the approach
that town meeting wants to take.
Yeah. So what motion a is, is what we know
as CPA 25 1.
And what this is, is an application submittal
by the Bacon free library for the preservation
and restoration of the historic fence
that actually surrounds the properties at 56
and 58 Elliot Street.
It is a cast iron fence.
And so what they are asking for is $236,650
for the preservation of this fence.
The fence would be removed offsite, completely restored,
and then reinstalled later.
And that fence is the one, the fence,
if I know the property, it's the one
between the library facing where the dam is right now.
Yep. It wraps around most of it the building, except
for there are a couple parts,
and I would have to let the applicant
actually better explain this,
but my understanding is, is portions of it was removed
for the World War ii.
Like I'm drawing blank.
So they'll, they can tell you more about that.
We'll go through the more detail. Yeah, yeah. And we'll,
and so each motion, this is the first of, of the seven,
but the the each motion will will be discussed
and potentially debated it separately.
Yep. Each one's separate. So that is, that one is under
historic preservation and then a portion
of those funds are coming outta
the historic preservation bucket.
The rest is coming out of the Budget reserve. Okay.
Motion B is actually for the Morris Institute,
the historic portion, so not the entirety,
but what they're looking for is 150,000.
Or sorry, motion B that's not, sorry.
Motion B is actually what they know as housing for All.
Okay. Housing for All is actually a several community
or several, several organizations getting together to
basically create a program that is for
eviction prevention and tenant based rental assistance.
So they're asking for 150,000 for two years for a total
of 300,000.
And so that would be a, the group is Family Promise,
Natick Service Council, Natick Council on Aging.
It's also supported by the Natick Affordable Housing Trust.
All organizations that if you're paying attention what's
happening in town, you know they're doing really great work.
Yes, exactly. Sorry about that.
Motion C is actually the Morris Institute.
So what this one is, is CPA 25 3.
It's a study and design
for the historic Morris Institute Library,
which is right over here at 14 East Central Street.
They're asking for $115,000 from the
historic preservation bucket.
And so what they would be able to do with those funds is
to determine what actually needs to be done because CPC
and CPA funds cannot be used for general maintenance.
And so some of the items that may need
to be done on the historic portion would fall under
maintenance, which cannot, CPA funds cannot be used for.
So that's what they would be using these funds to determine
what needs to be done, what is more
Of a planning type of activity.
Exactly. Yep. And so that is motion C.
Motion D is CPA 25 4,
which is a memorial beach shade structure.
So there's already two shade structures
that already exist at Memorial Beach.
This would be for the purchase of a third shade structure.
It's important to know that once this shade
shade structure is purchased, anything
after that would fall under maintenance.
So the two existing sales that are on the two
existing shade structures, those are under maintenance
and those would be removed at the end of the season
and replaced because they are meeting their
expected life, which is about 10 years.
So that one is for $40,000 motion E,
that is CPA 25 5.
This is an exciting project.
It is a South Natick parks improvement
design and permitting.
So these are the parks that are located at seven 11
and 23 Pleasant Street.
And so what they are asking for right now is $82,500
to finish the design and permitting work.
They had actually gotten a lot of the funding to this point
of the project from the MVP grant
and then probably MVP funds for the construction.
So all they really need at this time is money
for the final design and permitting.
The next one is motion F.
This is the Historic Preservation Project.
And so what this is is preservation
of Natick 1775 Battle of Bunker Hill Muster roll.
They're requesting $10,000,
which would actually preserve this document,
which is well over now 250 years old,
representing the 42 men that served at the Battle
of Bunker Bunker Hill.
So this would be for the preservation so
that others can enjoy it in the future.
And I had asked the question, when this came under the
finance committee, would this be done in time
for our 250th celebrations?
And they, and they said yes, that's their goal.
That if this is approved, that hopefully they can get all
the work done and so that folks in the town can,
can enjoy and see that.
And its restored state come next July 4th. Yeah.
And if you have time to take a look at
that on the website,
you can see the actual document. It's an image.
It's impressive. Yeah,
It is very impressive.
The fact that it was just in a private collection
for a long time and then they found it.
So yeah, it's really cool.
The last motion that we have is motion G This is the request
for $750,000 for the project known
as CPA 25 dash seven five Auburn Street five.
Auburn Street is a affordable housing project
with a historic preservation aspect of it,
Commonly referred to as the former Elliot School. Yep.
Former Elliot Elliot School.
And so what they're requesting is, is $750,000
for the construction costs,
which would commence in July of 2027.
Now the, the, the folks making the proposal for that,
they, when they came to finance committee,
there were some questions asked about, you know,
this additional dollar is like, you know, what,
what the money might be spent on.
So is there any indication in terms of
what the sponsor is looking for to spend those funds on?
It's a little unclear in the sense of like,
they know their budget better than we do.
They had previously mentioned like remediation funds
and cover costs and associated with redesign
of architecturals.
However, it is seven 50 within their general budget.
So that may change
Or, so if, if, if it, if the project were to go forward
and tell me where to vote favorably on it,
that money could be used
for anything related to that project
As long as it falls underneath the
affordable housing piece.
But also that would be a question for the applicant. Okay.
It is the goal at town meeting to one,
have the CPC represent the high level of these projects.
And then if town meeting members were willing
to have the individual members
answer questions because again,
They know And that, and that's always an option, right?
Yeah. If a town, if if there's a town meeting member
that asks if you know someone you know from outside
of Natick or is related to the project,
could speak without Objection.
Yeah. Town meeting has in the past allowed folks to speak
to topics, so Yeah.
Because they know their projects a lot better than we do.
Yeah, that's probably a great way of, I think wrapping up
where we're at for, for discussing the zoning things.
As as always, thanks for coming in. Thank you.
There is a lot to go through here.
Again, if you've got specific questions about anything
zoning related, anything CPC related, please go
to the town website and checking on that.
Thanks Amanda. Awesome.
Thank you for having me. Thanks.
Hello everyone. We're here
to talk about more zoning articles on the warrant
for the fall 2025 town meeting in this case Article 29.
Article 29 is actually a citizens petition
and we're joined now by Heather Rockwood
who represents the Natick Center Associates
and other interested parties about this article.
Also, Amanda stuck around as well 'cause this is zoning and,
and as expert on zoning,
we're gonna, we're gonna keep talking about that.
So just kind of walk us through what's going
on with Article 29.
Where did this come from and, and
and where do we expect to see happen at town meeting? Yeah,
Sure.
So I created the citizens petition to
represent the businesses in the center gateway
and the downtown mixed use zone,
which we know as Natick Center.
So at being from the Natick Center Associates.
So in the past spring in 2025, the businesses
who usually put their A-frames out in the spring were
notified by the town that a-frames are not allowed in the
downtown mixed use zone and the center gateway.
So we went around
and let everybody know that that was happening
and the feedback we were getting was we want our
A-frames from the businesses.
So I went to surrounded by business owners, I went
to the select board and wrote them a letter
and said, Hey, can we get a special dispensation
for these A-frame signs?
And those A-frames are just, just what you think.
They're those signs that are out on the sidewalk
that look like big a's sometimes they're called sandwich
board signs, sometimes sidewalk signs.
And the select board graciously allowed us
to keep our sandwich board signs for
the summer months when we want them.
And gave us the dis special dispensation
until December 31st, 2025.
Okay. With the special understanding
that we would then work together
to look at the entire zoning bylaw on signage for these two
districts for the downtown mixed use and the center gateway.
Okay. So that's
what we have here is we gathered a working group of
both Amanda and Morgan from the town.
We had Paul and Katie Love, who are both
NCA representatives,
but they're also on also on
the economic development committee. Paul
Being Paul Joseph and
Paul Joseph and Katie Love.
Okay. And then we had several business owners.
We had Jill Han, who is the owner of Metro Pets
and we had, oh gosh, I'm blanking on Andrew's last name,
Andrew from Licious.
Okay.
I do like Licious just on the record.
Love to and, and we also had a few
planning board members come. We had
Peter Tson,
Peter Notten, and Terry and Terry.
Yep. And they both came
and sat on, on a few different meetings each.
And we worked from May until basically up
until our first planning board meeting monthly.
And then as we got closer weekly on the zoning bylaw,
discussing the entirety of it, you know,
allowing aframe signs or flags
because sometimes you can't fit an AFRAME sign on this piece
of sidewalk in front of a business.
But also on making the definitions more clear
because the definition, there weren't really much definition
of what a side a sidewalk sign is or any of the other signs.
We also worked on making the way to get a sign much easier.
So now when a building is planned
and is at the planning board, you're going
to get a sign box assigned to you.
And when businesses come in
and want to move into that building
and put a sign up, as long as it fits within that sign box,
it's a very easy process.
It's when they don't want to fit in that sign box
that they then have to get special permission for it.
But it lays it all out in the zoning bylaws.
So it makes it it we're calling it a demystification. Yeah.
Of getting signs and having signs and yeah.
So we have this really great document that we've worked on
that we think is an update
and really caters to the businesses
and the building owners in the center gateway
and downtown mixed use zones.
And from the town's perspective,
knowing this is a zoning bylaw change, is there anything
that that town meeting should be aware of in terms
of what's being proposed here in terms of changing
how things happen other than just there just being
signage, which we've already seen?
Yeah, it's just gonna continue to be there.
It's continuing to be signage.
It was really trying to help one at this time,
small business owners really trying to get their signs up
and running as quickly as possible because time is money.
Especially when you are a small business
people not knowing you're there.
The other thing is, is really trying to align us with
what the envision is for Natick Center.
We've had a lot of great planning documents
and a lot of great work done to the state
that actually hasn't been implemented.
And the longer you wait on a planning document,
the more time passes and becomes irrelevant.
We also did look at communities
that other people had actually referenced.
We looked at Salem, Newberry, port Brookline, Wellesley.
We also looked at like New Port, Rhode Island, Portsmouth,
New Hampshire, Portland, Maine, Burlington, Vermont, to see
what their downtowns were really doing in terms
of the signage and what they were promoting.
And so what we tried to do is make it a comprehensive update
for specifically the downtown mixed use
and the center gateway at this time, this bylaw
that has been updated would hopefully be actually replicated
for the rest of the community at a later date.
Okay. Based on the different districts.
'cause not all parts of Natick are the same.
We've got very different at Golden Triangle versus the East
Natick tech park, which is very different from even,
you know, what's at Cloverleaf
and Sherwood Plaza as is dean in Strathmore Road.
Right. You want that pedestrian traffic by the business.
That's really what you're capitalizing on here. Oh yes.
Yeah. And so there's a lot of things
and we know that, you know, people wanted
to see maybe internally illuminated signs.
And that is a conversation
to have when the whole bylaw is in play.
Not specifically the Natick Center.
'cause what we were relying on was
what's already in the zoning bylaw was allowed
everywhere or not allowed everywhere.
And just specifically focusing on Natick Center
and the downtown mixed use.
So when we do do the comprehensive update
of the signed bylaw, which is always complicated
because signs are just one of those things
that you either love 'em, you hate 'em,
everyone's got their own opinions about them.
And that's when we would actually get into that nitty gritty
of internally illuminated versus not
what is a sign, what is not.
But this is really just trying to focus, focus on
how do we support the small businesses,
how do we support Natick Center
and the Center Gateway in addition to making it as easy
as possible for people to get good planning done.
And so I just want to say it's not a small feat
to bring a citizens petition to
through the process for town meeting.
It's not a small feat to bring a zoning
change to town meeting.
And here you are doing both at the same time.
So kudos to you for working together with the town
and hitting all those, those check boxes on the way through.
So looking forward to hearing about this at
at at the Florida Town meeting.
Thanks for coming in to talk about it today. Thank you.
Thank you.